add documentation for StateStore Query API (#1874)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/state-management/howto-state-query-api.md

---
type: docs

> title: "How-To: Query the state"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How-To: Query state"
```

> linkTitle: "How-To: Query the state"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "How-To: Query state"
```

weight: 250
description: "API for querying state stores"
---

{{% alert title="alpha" color="warning" %}}

> The State Query API is in **alpha** stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state query API is in **alpha** stage.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Introduction

> The State Query API provides a way of querying the key/value data stored in state store components. This query API is not a replacement for a complete query language, and is focused on retrieving, filtering and sorting key/value data that you have saved through the state management APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The state query API provides a way of querying the key/value data stored in state store components. This query API is not a replacement for a complete query language, and is focused on retrieving, filtering and sorting key/value data that you have saved through the state management APIs.
```

This query API does not support querying of actor state stored in a state store. For that you need to use the query API for the specific database.
See [querying actor state]({{< ref "state-management-overview.md#querying-actor-state" >}}).

You can find additional information in the [resources]({{< ref "#resources" >}}) section.

## Querying the state

> Users submit query requests via HTTP POST/PUT or gRPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You submit query requests via HTTP POST/PUT or gRPC.
```

The body of the request is the JSON map with 3 entries: `filter`, `sort`, and `pagination`.

> The `filter` section specifies the query conditions in the form of a tree of key/value operations, where the key is the operator and the value is the operands.

Reviewer: Is filter a required section in the query?

Author: not required. If omitted, all entries will be returned.

The following operations are supported:
| Operator | Operands | Description |
|----------|-----------|-------------|
| `EQ`       | key:value  | key == value|
| `IN`        | key:[]value| key == value[0] OR key == value[1] OR ... OR key == value[n] |
| `AND`    | []operation|  operation[0] AND operation[1] AND ... AND operation[n] |
| `OR`      | []operation|  operation[0] OR operation[1] OR ... OR operation[n] |

> The `sort` is an optional section is an ordered array of `key:order` pairs, where `key` is a key in the state store, and the `order` is an optional string indicating sorting order: `"ASC"` for ascending and `"DESC"` for descending. If omitted, ascending order is the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sort` is an optional section and is an ordered array of `key:order` pairs, where `key` is a key in the state store, and the `order` is an optional string indicating sorting order: `"ASC"` for ascending and `"DESC"` for descending. If omitted, ascending order is the default.
```

> The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and used in consecutive queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and is used in subsequent consecutive queries.
```

> Below is an example of the query request JSON body.

Reviewer: There are a few things you need to add here. Read this whole comment first and I am happy to talk if this is not clear. 

1) Have the example data in a table that you show people that you are going to query. In other words have 3-5 rows of data stored as key/value pairs that people can really see that this is stored like. And then say these are records of people with information about they work roles and where they work
2) Then start with a really simple query example. Use only the `sort` operator, so get a list of people names so that people see this with a "hello world" like example on the data above.
3) Then add a runable bash and Powershell script like the example here https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/state-management/howto-get-save-state/ to show how this query would be used in practice. 
4) Ideally you would also add a code example also in Python.
5) Then below  you can then say, "Now let's look at a more complex query example"

The whole idea here is that you need to explain this to someone brand new and it really helps to see the full picture. Currently I am trying to figure out what this data key/value format looks like and the full walk through of the data that I originally stored would help. In fact now I think about this, I would suggest adding a Save bash/powershell script example for one of the person records, so that someone could try this out on a Dapr sidecar instance themselves. That would then make the how to more complete, so 
1) Bash/Powershell to save person record example
2)  Bash/Powershell  to query with a simple and more complex example.

> This query retrieves all records where people either (1) belong to "Dev Ops" organization, or (2) belong to "Finance" and reside in Washington or California.

Reviewer: I still think this description is not clear enough. For example the field key name is `person.org` where the value is "Dev Ops". I just want to be clear that `person.org` is different from just saying people.

Add that the results are returned sorted first in descending alphabetically order by `state` and then by ascending alphabetically order by `person.id` value. 

Also mention the pagination value below

```json
{
    "query": {
        "filter": {
            "OR": [
                {
                    "EQ": {"person.org": "Dev Ops"}
                },
                {
                    "AND": [
                        {
                            "EQ": {"person.org": "Finance"}
                        },
                        {
                            "IN": {"state": ["CA", "WA"]}
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        },
        "sort": [
            {
            "key": "state",
                "order": "DESC"
            },
            {
                "key": "person.id"
            }
        ],
        "pagination": {
            "limit": 3
        }
    }
}
```

> The query request is translated into a native query language and executed in the state store component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For understanding, this query request is translated into the native query language and executed by the state store component.
```

> In the case of SQL, the aforementioned query is translated into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in the case of SQL, the aforementioned query is translated into the following SQL query
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM c WHERE
  person.org = "Dev Ops" OR
  (person.org = "Finance" AND state IN ("CA", "WA"))
ORDER BY
  state DESC,
  person.id ASC
LIMIT 3
```

> Upon successful execution, the state store returns a JSON object with a list of matching items and the token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon successful execution, the state store returns a JSON object with a list of matching items and the pagination token. This is an example of what could be returned.
```

```json
{
  "results": [
    {
      "key": "4",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "id": 1021,
          "org": "Dev Ops"
        },
        "city": "Seattle",
        "state": "WA"
      },
      "etag": "d58da615-2003-44ad-b349-cbabd54dcbfe"
    },
    {
      "key": "1",
      "data": {
        "city": "Spokane",
        "state": "WA",
        "person": {
          "org": "Dev Ops",
          "id": 1034,
        }
      },
      "etag": "256c951a-b63d-4c6c-a383-d2dc8f9d5071"
    },
    {
      "key": "3",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "org": "Finance",
          "id": 1017
        },
        "city": "Sacramento",
        "state": "CA"
      },
      "etag": "704217a7-edc9-4b5c-b027-8468b84106a9"
    }
  ],
  "token": "5"
}

> ```

Reviewer: You need to add  an example that shows how to use the pagination token on a subsequent query as the final example.
This

The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and used in consecutive queries.

## Resources

>  - [API specification]({{< ref "state_api.md#state-query" >}}),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Read the [Query API reference ]({{< ref "state_api.md#state-query" >}}),
```

The `filter` is an optional section. It specifies the query conditions in the form of a tree of key/value operations, where the key is the operator and the value is the operands.

The following operations are supported:
| Operator |  Operands   | Description  |
|----------|-------------|--------------|
| `EQ`     | key:value   | key == value |
| `IN`     | key:[]value | key == value[0] OR key == value[1] OR ... OR key == value[n] |
| `AND`    | []operation |  operation[0] AND operation[1] AND ... AND operation[n] |
| `OR`     | []operation |  operation[0] OR operation[1] OR ... OR operation[n] |

If `filter` section is omitted, the query returns all entries.

The `sort` is an optional section and is an ordered array of `key:order` pairs, where `key` is a key in the state store, and the `order` is an optional string indicating sorting order: `"ASC"` for ascending and `"DESC"` for descending. If omitted, ascending order is the default.

The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and is used in subsequent queries.

> Let's consider an example of a dataset with employee records containing employee ID, department, state, and city.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example data and query
Let's consider an example of a dataset with employee records containing employee ID, department, state, and city.
```

Reviewer: Add a heading here to break up the text and for the transition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider an example of a dataset with employee records containing employee ID, organization, city and state
```

> To better illustrate functionality, let's have employee ID and department as a nested JSON object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better illustrate functionality, let's have organizational (org) and employee ID (id) as a nested JSON object.
```

Here is an example of a key/value pair to be sent to a state store:
```json
{
  "key": "1",
  "value": {
    "person": {
      "org": "Dev Ops",
      "id": 1036
    },
    "city": "Seattle",
    "state": "WA"
  }
}
```
The `key` is the unique ID, and the `value` is the JSON object with employee record.

> In the state store the data is stored in the similar fashion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the state store the data is stored in the similar fashion. The image below shows employee records stored in a MongoDb database.
```

<table><tr><td>

>     <img src="/images/mongodb-dataset.png" width=500 alt="Sample dataset" class="center">

Reviewer: Please rename image to "state-management-query-mongodb-dataset.png"

</td></tr></table>

Each entry has the `_id` member as a concatenated object key, and the `value` member containing the JSON record.

> The query API allows you to select records by using JSON structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query API allows you to select records from this JSON structure.
```

> Consider an example in which you want to get records of all employees from the "Dev Ops" department

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at a more complex example. Say you want to get the records of all employees from the "Dev Ops" department
```

and those employees from the "Finance" departing residing in the states of Washington and California.

In addition you want to sort the results first by state in descending alphabetical order, and then by employee ID in ascending order.
And you want to process up to 3 records at a time.

This is your query:

```json
{
    "query": {
        "filter": {
            "OR": [
                {
                    "EQ": {"value.person.org": "Dev Ops"}
                },
                {
                    "AND": [
                        {
                            "EQ": {"value.person.org": "Finance"}
                        },
                        {
                            "IN": {"value.state": ["CA", "WA"]}
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        },
        "sort": [
            {
                "key": "value.state",
                "order": "DESC"
            },
            {
                "key": "value.person.id"
            }
        ],
        "pagination": {
            "limit": 3
        }
    }
}
```

> For understanding, this query request is translated into the native query language and executed by the state store component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some background understanding, this query request is translated into the native query language and executed by the state store component.
```

For example, in the case of SQL, the aforementioned query is translated into the following SQL query
```sql
SELECT * FROM c WHERE
  person.org = "Dev Ops" OR
  (person.org = "Finance" AND state IN ("CA", "WA"))
ORDER BY
  state DESC,
  person.id ASC
LIMIT 3
```

> The following example shows how to execute a query against a state store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the query API
Having shown you the example data and query, let's do an example of how to execute a query against a state store using scripts.
```

The `filter` is an optional section. It specifies the query conditions in the form of a tree of key/value operations, where the key is the operator and the value is the operands.

The following operations are supported:
| Operator |  Operands   | Description  |
|----------|-------------|--------------|
| `EQ`     | key:value   | key == value |
| `IN`     | key:[]value | key == value[0] OR key == value[1] OR ... OR key == value[n] |
| `AND`    | []operation |  operation[0] AND operation[1] AND ... AND operation[n] |
| `OR`     | []operation |  operation[0] OR operation[1] OR ... OR operation[n] |

If `filter` section is omitted, the query returns all entries.

The `sort` is an optional section and is an ordered array of `key:order` pairs, where `key` is a key in the state store, and the `order` is an optional string indicating sorting order: `"ASC"` for ascending and `"DESC"` for descending. If omitted, ascending order is the default.

The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and is used in subsequent queries.

> ## Example data and query

Reviewer: Add 
"Let's look at some examples, first some simple one and then getting more complex."
<Add queries for 
All the employees in the city of Seattle sorted in descending order
All employees in the DevOps or the Finance department
>

---
type: docs
title: "How-To: Query state"
linkTitle: "How-To: Query state"
weight: 250
description: "API for querying state stores"
---

{{% alert title="alpha" color="warning" %}}
The state query API is in **alpha** stage.
{{% /alert %}}

## Introduction

The state query API provides a way of querying the key/value data stored in state store components. This query API is not a replacement for a complete query language, and is focused on retrieving, filtering and sorting key/value data that you have saved through the state management APIs.

Even though the state store is a key/value store, the `value` might be a JSON document with its own hierarchy, keys, and values.
The query API allows you to use those keys and values to retrive corresponding documents.

This query API does not support querying of actor state stored in a state store. For that you need to use the query API for the specific database.
See [querying actor state]({{< ref "state-management-overview.md#querying-actor-state" >}}).

> You can find additional information in the [resources]({{< ref "#resources" >}}) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find additional information in the [related links]({{< ref "#related-links" >}}) section.
```

Reviewer: @dmitsh - Getting really close! Just a few more updates that I have suggestions for!

The following operations are supported:
| Operator |  Operands   | Description  |
|----------|-------------|--------------|
| `EQ`     | key:value   | key == value |
| `IN`     | key:[]value | key == value[0] OR key == value[1] OR ... OR key == value[n] |
| `AND`    | []operation |  operation[0] AND operation[1] AND ... AND operation[n] |
| `OR`     | []operation |  operation[0] OR operation[1] OR ... OR operation[n] |

If `filter` section is omitted, the query returns all entries.

The `sort` is an optional section and is an ordered array of `key:order` pairs, where `key` is a key in the state store, and the `order` is an optional string indicating sorting order: `"ASC"` for ascending and `"DESC"` for descending. If omitted, ascending order is the default.

The `pagination` is an optional section containing `limit` and `token` parameters. `limit` sets the page size. `token` is an iteration token returned by the component, and is used in subsequent queries.

For some background understanding, this query request is translated into the native query language and executed by the state store component.

## Example data and query

> Let's look at some real examples, starting with simple one and progressing towards more complex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at some real examples, starting with simple and progressing towards more complex ones.
```

> As a dataset, let's consider a [collection of with employee records](../query-api-examples/dataset.json) containing employee ID, department, state, and city.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a dataset, let's consider a [collection of with employee records](../query-api-examples/dataset.json) containing employee ID, organization, state, and city.
```

Notice that this dataset is an array of key/value pairs where `key` is the unique ID, and the `value` is the JSON object with employee record.

> To better illustrate functionality, let's have organization name (org) and employee ID (id) as a nested JSON object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better illustrate functionality, let's have organization name (org) and employee ID (id) as a nested JSON person object.
```

> First, you need to create an instance of MongoDB, which will be your state store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to create an instance of MongoDB, which is your state store.
```

```bash
docker run -d --rm -p 27017:27017 --name mongodb mongo:5
```

> Next step is to start Dapr application. Refer to this [component configuration file](../query-api-examples/components/mongodb.yml), which instructs Dapr to use MongoDB as its state store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next is to start a Dapr application. Refer to this [component configuration file](../query-api-examples/components/mongodb.yml), which instructs Dapr to use MongoDB as its state store.
```

```bash
dapr run --app-id demo --dapr-http-port 3500 --components-path query-api-examples/components
```

> Next step is to populate the state store, so you could then query it later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now populate the state store with the employee dataset, so you can then query it later.
```

```bash
curl -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d @query-api-examples/dataset.json http://localhost:3500/v1.0/state/statestore
```

> Once populated, you can examine the data in the state store. The image below a fragment of MongoDB UI displaying employee records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once populated, you can examine the data in the state store. The image below a section of the MongoDB UI displaying employee records.
```

```
{{% /codetab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

The query result is an array of matching key/value pairs in the requested order:
```json
{
  "results": [
    {
      "key": "3",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "org": "Finance",
          "id": 1071
        },
        "city": "Sacramento",
        "state": "CA"
      },
      "etag": "44723d41-deb1-4c23-940e-3e6896c3b6f7"
    },
    {
      "key": "7",
      "data": {
        "city": "San Francisco",
        "state": "CA",
        "person": {
          "id": 1015,
          "org": "Dev Ops"
        }
      },
      "etag": "0e69e69f-3dbc-423a-9db8-26767fcd2220"
    },
    {
      "key": "5",
      "data": {
        "state": "CA",
        "person": {
          "org": "Hardware",
          "id": 1007
        },
        "city": "Los Angeles"
      },
      "etag": "f87478fa-e5c5-4be0-afa5-f9f9d75713d8"
    },
    {
      "key": "9",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "org": "Finance",
          "id": 1002
        },
        "city": "San Diego",
        "state": "CA"
      },
      "etag": "f5cf05cd-fb43-4154-a2ec-445c66d5f2f8"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Example 2.

> Let's find all employees from the "Dev Ops" and "Hardware" departments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's now find all employees from the "Dev Ops" and "Hardware" organizations.
```

This is the [query](../query-api-examples/query2.json):
```json
{
    "query": {
        "filter": {
            "IN": { "value.person.org": [ "Dev Ops", "Hardware" ] }
        }
    }
}
```

An equivalent of this query in SQL is:
```sql
SELECT * FROM c WHERE
  value.person.org IN ("Dev Ops", "Hardware")
```

Execute the query with the following command:
{{< tabs "HTTP API (Bash)" "HTTP API (PowerShell)" >}}
{{% codetab %}}
```bash
curl -s -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d @query-api-examples/query2.json http://localhost:3500/v1.0-alpha1/state/statestore/query | jq .
```
{{% /codetab %}}
{{% codetab %}}
```powershell
Invoke-RestMethod -Method Post -ContentType 'application/json' -InFile query-api-examples/query2.json -Uri 'http://localhost:3500/v1.0-alpha1/state/statestore/query'
```
{{% /codetab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> Similar to the previos example, the result is an array of matching key/value pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the previous example, the result is an array of matching key/value pairs.
```

                "key": "value.state",
                "order": "DESC"
            },
            {
                "key": "value.person.id"
            }
        ],
        "pagination": {
            "limit": 3,
            "token": "3"
        }
    }
}
```
And the result of this query is:
```json
{
  "results": [
    {
      "key": "9",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "org": "Finance",
          "id": 1002
        },
        "city": "San Diego",
        "state": "CA"
      },
      "etag": "f5cf05cd-fb43-4154-a2ec-445c66d5f2f8"
    },
    {
      "key": "7",
      "data": {
        "city": "San Francisco",
        "state": "CA",
        "person": {
          "id": 1015,
          "org": "Dev Ops"
        }
      },
      "etag": "0e69e69f-3dbc-423a-9db8-26767fcd2220"
    },
    {
      "key": "3",
      "data": {
        "person": {
          "org": "Finance",
          "id": 1071
        },
        "city": "Sacramento",
        "state": "CA"
      },
      "etag": "44723d41-deb1-4c23-940e-3e6896c3b6f7"
    }
  ],
  "token": "6"
}
```
That way you can update the pagination token in the query and iterate through the results until no more records are returned.

> ## Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Related links
```

>  - [query API reference ]({{< ref "state_api.md#state-query" >}}),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [Query API reference ]({{< ref "state_api.md#state-query" >}}),
```

>  - [supported components]({{< ref supported-state-stores.md >}}),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [State store components with those that implement query support]({{< ref supported-state-stores.md >}}),
```

>  - [implementation guide](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/state/Readme.md#implementing-state-query-api).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [State store query API implementation guide](https://github.com/dapr/components-contrib/blob/master/state/Readme.md#implementing-state-query-api).
```
